
# SIE ENG270 Prey Predator model for Lynxs and Hares


## Project Overview

### Objective
- Simulate predator-prey population dynamics using historical data.
- Analyze how changes in predator efficiency and prey reproduction rates impact ecosystem stability.
- Model the effects of environmental disturbances using Gaussian peak functions.

### Key Features
- **Mathematical Model:** Lotka-Volterra differential equations.
- **Real-world Data:** Historical dataset of lynx and hare populations (Hudson's Bay Company, 1845–1935).
- **Scenarios:** Simulates population changes under environmental disruptions.
- **Languages:** Python (data processing and visualization), C (numerical computations).



## Folder Structure

```plaintext
├── code/
│   ├── define_parameters.py      # Python script for defining parameters
│   ├── interpolation.py      # Python script for data interpolation
│   ├── model.c               # C program for solving differential equations
│   ├── test.py        # Python script for plotting results
├── intermediate outputs (files created whilst running the code)
│   ├── interpolated_data.csv # interpolated data of populations generated by interpolation.py
│   ├── parameters.txt # text file containing the 4 initial parameters genrated by define_parameters.py, and used by model.c
├── data/
│   ├── data.csv # Historical dataset for lynx and hare populations
├── results/
│   ├── model.csv             # Output of the basic Lotka-Volterra model
│   ├── model(with_peak_at_t=1883).csv # Output for scenario 1
│   ├── model(with_peak_at_t=1877).csv # Output for scenario 2


```
## Prerequisites
Ensure you have the following installed:
- Python 3.12.7 with the libraries:
    1. numpy
    2. scipy
    3. matplotlib
- A C Compiler (e.g., GCC)

### Inputs and outputs

Inputs:
- data.csv 

Outputs:
- interpolated_data.csv (generated by the Python program "interpolation.py")
- parameters.txt (generated by the Python program "define_parameters.py")
- 3 models with different scenarios (generated by the C program "equations_solver.c")
- 5 graphs (generated by the python program "test.py")

All the outputs are given but are also generated by launching the program.

## Implementation structure
1. interpolation.py:
    - interpolates the given populations data
    - takes data.csv as the input and generates interpolated_data.csv as output
2. define_parameters.py:
    - finding the best initial parameters in order to fit the given data
    - takes interpolated_data.csv and generates parameters.txt
    - parameters.txt contains the 4 parameters needed in the C code.
3. equations_solver.c:
    - receives values from parameters.txt
    - runs accordingly
    - generates 3 csv files:
      - model (with_peak_at_t=0)
      - model (with_peak_at_t=1883)
      - model (with_peak_at_t=1877)
4. test.py:
    - generates plots starting from the 3 csv files.
    - it generates 5 plots.
5. run.py
  It is the program necessary to reproduce the results.

## Instructions

To reproduce results in the report:
1. Every file evoked above needs to be in the same folder of run.py
2. Open and run run.py

## Requirements

Versions of Python and C used are as follows. 
```
$ python --version
Python 3.12.7

$ gcc --version
gcc (Rev3, Built by MSYS2 project) 14.1.0

```

The Python libraries utilized were the following:
``` 
scipy:
- scipy.otimpize
- scipy.interpolate
- scipy.optimize
pandas
matplotlib.pyplot
csv
subprocess
os
```

The C packages utilized were:
```
<stdio.h>
<stdlib.h>
<math.h>
```


## Credits

The equations and the assumptions made have been taken from Ecology (fourth edition), by Ricklefs and Miller
The data usen have been taken from Hudson Bay company Lynx-Hare dataset from Leigh 1968

## Author:

Raffaele Cardillo, Antoine Parrain
